Thank you, everybody. I'm very happy to be here. My name is Mike Garcia, and I'm a Director
of Data Services for Medible, and today I want to talk about how you can scale your
data validation workflow with the pointblank R package and Posit Connect. Ten years ago,
I was a data analyst for a very large utility company in the country, and one of my main
responsibilities was to create and maintain these energy savings forecasts, and I have
a confession to make. I really didn't know what I was doing, and I was never confident
in the numbers that I was producing, and that was because there was no formal process for
these forecasting tasks. And when it came time to do our data validation, to check our
work, it involved a group of us going into a conference room, throwing everything up
on a big screen, and just opening up Excel workbooks, tracing through cells, and looking
at where the formulas landed. It was not a fun process. Today, I can confidently say
that this is not how my team operates at Medible. In fact, we have robust procedures for everything
that we do, especially when it comes to data validation. And that's what I want to talk
about today. By building upon our foundation of data quality measures at Medible, expanding
the functionality of the pointblank R package, and leveraging Posit Connect with its API,
we were able to design and implement a fully end-to-end scalable solution for our data
validation needs. And so, for the next 15 minutes, I want to highlight four challenges
that we came across, and how we addressed them. Before we dive any deeper, I'd like
to give a little bit of background about Medible. So, Medible is a technology startup with a
state-of-the-art platform for conducting clinical trials. Our clients are some of the largest
pharma companies and contract research organizations in the world. And we license our platform
to these clients in the form of web and mobile apps that we build and deploy for them as
a service. These apps are used by patients and caregivers and doctors all throughout
their trial participation. And some of the activities that they may do on these apps
are completing pain assessments on a weekly basis, or entering diary data every day detailing
their experiences with a new investigational drug. All of these activities with the apps
generate a lot of data, and that data gets stored securely on the Medible platform. And
it's the job of my team in data services at Medible to transfer that data from the platform
to the hands of the client. But that's not as straightforward as you would think, because
data models between studies and projects vary. And that's primarily driven by three factors.
One, protocols just vary in complexity and design, and so our apps sometimes need to
as well in order to accommodate the needs. Second, trials can last for years, but our
technology moves a lot faster than that. So if we want to implement bug fixes or introduce
a new capability, sometimes we need to do that on a study-by-study basis. And lastly,
clients have very strict expectations on what they want their data to look like and how
they want to receive that. And that's also driven by the fact that they have these large
systems in their organization. And so it's up to us to work with them to make sure that
they can ingest the data that we are sending to them. Now, all this flexibility meant that
our processes, especially for data validation, had to be flexible, but that meant manual.
And four years ago, that was okay. That worked well. But as the number of studies that we
supported grew exponentially, we started to notice some data quality issues creeping into
our deliverables. So late last year, we made this conscious effort to really streamline
and automate a lot of what we were doing related to data validation, and that's when we stumbled
upon the Pointblank package. Pointblank allows you to validate your data using these simple
yet powerful validation functions. For example, if you wanted to test if a set of values in
a column were less than or equal to another value or set of values in another column,
there's a function for that. The way that it works is you create what is known as an
agent object. You pass to it a single target table that you want to validate and some other
data, like how you want to be alerted if a test case would fail. You then pass this object
to these validation functions, and these act as sort of instructions for what your agent
should do when it's ready to validate. And then when you are ready to validate, you call
the interrogate function. So in essence, you're interrogating the agent for the information
that you want. And the result is a really nice-looking, easy-to-digest HTML report.
On the left, you have a nice color-coding scheme that tells you what passed, what failed,
or if you hit another threshold that you set when creating your agent. Each record represents
a validation function that you set and the columns next to it that you apply them to.
And on the right, you have some descriptive statistics telling you how many cases were
run for each function, how many passes and fails, and their proportions. And at first
glance, it was perfect. It was everything that we needed. The way that it integrated
with packages that we used already and technologies, and also its intuitive API and its source
code was easy to digest. However, once we actually started to implement it for our processes
and data, we noticed there were four specific challenges that we had to address before we
could do that. And that's what I'm going to walk through right now.
So, the first challenge is we wanted Point Blank to operate on more than just a single
target table. Here's an example of a data model for our study, for a very simple study
that we may see. And if we wanted to test each individual table, we would need to create
each individual agents and apply them to the tables. And that's at the core of Point Blank.
And we didn't want to change that for our needs. Instead, we wanted to bundle all of
these agents together into a collection that we can then operate on that collection. And
so, in typical R fashion, we wrapped everything into a list, and we applied some processing
to it that's specific to our needs, and we called it a test plan. And so, essentially,
it's a list of agents with some extra goodies that I'll talk about in a little bit. If you're
familiar with Point Blank, this is very much like a multi-agent report, and we borrowed
a lot from that. We're just extending upon it to perform operations on that actual multi-agent
instead of it being just a reporting function. So, in the background, this is a very simple
concept, but we modified lots of Point Blank and PINs functions to actually do what we
wanted to do with this. And also, we integrated it with the DM package, which we use for our
data modeling needs. So, when we want to create a test plan, it's very straightforward. You
pass in your individual agents, and then you pass to it also a test name, which we will
reference later on. And some of the data that gets stored with the test plan are the name
that we just passed through, as well as a test version that we get from PINs and Connect,
and I'll share very briefly. Now, when we're ready to validate our collection of agents
or our test plan, we have to run interrogate on each individual function, so each individual
agent. So, we basically map the interrogate function to all the agents, and we also force
the user to specifically pass in the data that they're going to validate, which is a
little different than how Point Blank works natively in my experience, but it also prevents
any scoping rules that we may encounter later while we're doing some sharing. And the result
is what's known as a multi-agent report. So, again, we borrowed this. We streamlined the
formatting of it a little bit for our needs, and we also did some things like streamline
the title of it. So, now the title, we have our test name, and we have the test version
for traceability reasons. The second challenge is we wanted to implement sharing and reusability
of the test plans that our team is creating. So, I showed a simple data model before, but
in reality, they look more like this, and you can guess that if we're validating each
table, the code, the Point Blank code to generate all that can get pretty large and pretty unwieldy
quickly. So, one feedback that we heard from the team is, how can we reuse these test plans
so that we're not recreating the wheel every single time we start a new study or want
to iterate on an existing test plan? So, copying-pasting is an option, but it's not really a practical
one in a production setting. So, if we revisit our create test plan function again, we could
do a little more in it. We could add some functionality. So, we're going to take each
of the individual agents inside of this test plan, and we're going to actually extract
the code that's needed to create that individual agent. So, it's kind of like we're reverse
engineering that part. And the reason for that is that we want to actually store that
code instead of the actual object, the agent object itself on Connect. So, we're going
to take that code, and we're going to convert it to JSON, and we're going to write it to
Connect as a pin. And JSON is because we want full transparency for anyone who's not a data
scientist to be able to go on to Connect and look to see what's actually going on with
the code. Now, with PositConnect, if you have a lot of content on there, sometimes
it's a little hard to filter around. So, you can set tags for easy filtering and navigating.
So, we set tags so that this could be a test plan. And by default, when you publish content
to Connect, it's just shared with yourself. You have to go into the UI and change that.
So, we actually use the PositConnect API to do that in the function itself. So, then we
share access with our data team by default. Here's a screenshot of what that pin looks
like on Connect. So, in typical fashion, you have the time it was last updated, the format,
which is JSON, and a streamlined description for it. And then you have your raw metadata
that's provided by pins. And with pins, you're also able to pass in some user-defined metadata.
And so, we hook up to that, and we include the name of the person that last modified
the test plan, as well as a commit message for that new version of the plan. So, we want
this to act more like a Git-based system. And if we expand upon that object, you're
not supposed to read this, but what I want to show here, it's actual JSON. It's unformatted,
but it's still JSON. And on the right in the box, you're just seeing that we're sharing
it with our internal data team group. So, if we want to take this and actually bring
it back into our studio and iterate on it, or use it as a jumping off point for the next
project, we have a convenience function called View Test Plan, where all we do is supply
the test name, and if not the latest version, the test version. And what it does is in your
IDE, opens up a new file pane, dumps all the code in there, and it's ready for you to modify
as needed. The third challenge was we wanted to automate with Posit Connect, because we
use it already for our study deployments. So, when you want to automate something with
R, R Markdown is usually the answer, or Quarto, or Flex Dashboard. And when you do that, there's
also a lot of ways you can create that document. So, we wanted to streamline that part. And
so, we created a function called Create Validate that actually takes your data and your test
plan from Connect, and it feeds it into a template that we've created internally, so
that it kind of streamlines that. So, all you have to do is run this function, provide
your data and your test name, and you get an R Markdown document that's ready to be
knit. Then, as we want to automate it, we have to deploy it to Connect. We can use the
great push button deployment option, but even still, when you do that, there are some options
that you need to set that we take for granted. Like, do you want to link your code? Do you
want to force an update if something exists already? Do you have all the dependencies
ready, those little check boxes that show up? So, again, we wanted to just make it easy
as possible to do this in a production setting. So, we created Deploy Validation, which essentially
wraps the deploy doc function from RS Connect. And similar to creating a test plan, we tag
it, we share it with our data team, and we set a default schedule using the API to run.
And what that looks like is a Flex Dashboard with two tabs. The first tab is Data and Sources.
It includes all the data that's needed to run and execute this test plan. So, that includes
the target table, references, as well as any reference documentation that's needed. If
you're familiar with Point Blank, we use that for, say, preconditions. And then on the bottom,
we have a URL to the Connect page for that pin, for that test plan that's being used
in here, again, for traceability reasons. On the right, I'm just showing that it is
scheduled by default for output once a week. And here is that multi-agent report that I
showed earlier, again, being shared with the data team. Now, of course, we want to know
what's happening when we execute these tests. And with Point Blank, we show that it integrates
with Blastula. So, we wanted to, again, borrow that concept and apply it to a test plan.
So, we're going to revisit our execute test plan function again. And all we're going to
look for is if any of the individual agents in that test plan failed. If they failed,
I want you to send me an email saying that it did with a specific template. Even if it
didn't fail, I still want an email telling me that it ran and it was successful. Here's
an example of what that email looks like. So, your subject will have the number of cases
that failed. This is an example of an email with a failed test plan that failed the time
the test was run and a textualized version of that multi-agent report. So, originally,
we had the multi-agent report coming through email. The formatting was a little wonky,
and we realized it wasn't that actionable for the team. So, this is what we have coming
to our inboxes. And lastly, we wanted to enable monitoring of everything that's going on.
So, you can imagine we have all of these test plans being executed automatically in our
production setting. And we also want to monitor the health of our dashboards. I'm sorry, we
want to monitor the health of all of our studies and test plans that are being executed. The
point of this is we want to drive change upstream to the engineers, to the study teams that
are actually creating these apps. So, in order to monitor it, we need to save our validation
results first. And so, again, let's revisit execute test plan. And we have this pseudocode
here, save validation results, where when that runs, it takes your executed test plans
and it passes them through as a pin into our cloud storage buckets. And then from there,
we're actually extracting summary data from these test plans that go into a small database.
And that database is powering a shiny app that we've created that helps us monitor what's
going on with the health of all these programs. So, we have some value boxes up top telling
us how many tests run, what's our failure rate. This is all fake data, by the way. What's
our failure rates and what are kind of the most offensive tests, the ones that are failing
the most. We have a table of everything that was run and also some historical trends of
failure rate to see what's going, what's improving or what's not. And so, in summary, by addressing
these four challenges, we were able to create that end-to-end scalable solution. But really,
it wouldn't have been possible with all the work that came before us. And so, from a medical
perspective, it was all those data quality measures that we actually used as the basis,
as the foundation for these test plans in knowing what to validate. And in terms of
our packages and technologies, everything here that's on the screen made this all possible.
And that's it. Thank you.
Thank you, Michael. So, what was like the biggest challenge that you all had in being
able to set up all this infrastructure?
We had the infrastructure with just the fact that we automated data transfers. It was one
getting to the mindset of actually making code to run these tests instead of doing it
manually, which the whole team had done. But then also, our data is pretty specific in
terms of like how the data is stored and what the column name looked like, things like that.
Things that you kind of took for granted. And originally, we tried to run point blank
on it. We would get errors. And so, it's just basically going into the source code and just
kind of picking apart what we needed, what we needed to change. And that's what took
most of the time. That was the biggest challenge.
Thank you again.
Thank you.